this is alternative radio I'm David Barr
semion this program features Peter Dale
Scott on the politics of global drug
trafficking Crusades against drugs are a
routine part of the political landscape
drug wars are declared with great
solemnity
Zara's are appointed and task forces are
formed billions of dollars are
appropriated mandatory sentencing is
enacted and more and more prisons are
built to house offenders yet like
dandelions drugs just won't go away
ever since Alfred McCoy's landmark book
the politics of heroin in Southeast Asia
evidence has accumulated that covert
u.s. involvement with regimes and
movements has exacerbated the
international drug problem Afghanistan
and Pakistan are just two recent
notorious examples of US policy
Peter Dale Scott is an expert on the
politics of global drug trafficking a
former Canadian diplomat and UC Berkeley
professor he's co-author of cocaine
politics drugs armies and the CIA in
Central America and the iran-contra
connection secret teams and covert
operations in the Reagan era Peter Dale
Scott spoke at Fort Lewis College in
Durango Colorado I think what I really
want to focus on primarily is the extent
to which global drug trafficking has
been reinforced and increased by
right-wing US interventions in other
parts of the world especially since
World War two and how the two of them
continue to reinforce each other today I
said you know this has been written
about quite a lot now
classic example is Italy where the
Americans in 1948 were frightened
the Communists might win an election
there and so they went in and beefed up
all of the right-wing elements including
the Mafia in Sicily which at the time
was almost a completely defeated
organization because Mussolini nobody
can be wrong all the time and one of the
things that Mussolini had done had
almost crushed the Mafia in Sicily
the Americans were frightened that this
would open up Sicily to a communist
takeover and almost everybody knows how
powerful the Mafia is in Sicily today it
hasn't always been that way it is that
way today largely as a result of US
policies towards Italy after World War
Two and that sort of a paradigm of what
I want to talk about generally at in
country after country France Indochina
Thailand Central America
you name it over and over again where we
see a major drug trafficking today we
see over and over that it is in areas
where the social structure of that
country has been skewed by right-wing US
intervention at one moment or another
now all through the Cold War of course
the United States justified what they
were doing by saying well the Communists
there they the Kremlin Stalin is
supporting the Communists in Italy the
Communists in France and therefore the
it's it's a completely unfair and doomed
contest unless we do the same thing on
the other side without trying to get too
severe about what happened during the
Cold War I'd like to say now the Cold
War is over there is no Kremlin in the
old sense anymore no certainly no
international communist movement if the
Cold War is over
and we and we realize that we have a
major drug problem in this country then
one of the things we should stop doing
is propping up corrupt drug corrupted
regimes in other parts of the world like
Peru like Guatemala and let those
countries work out their own futures and
take all that money over a hundred and
fifty billion perhaps quite a lot more
than a hundred and fifty billion which
is being spent on hopeless interdiction
programs trying to stop drugs from
coming into this country that obviously
haven't worked if in some cases may
actually have augmented the amount of
drugs coming in take all that money and
apply it to more humane and human based
solutions to the drug problem at home I
think most Americans are dimly aware
that when we had the Vietnam War
particularly the height of it between 68
to 75 we also had a heroin epidemic in
the United States a good deal of that
heroin coming from the so-called Golden
Triangle when the Vietnam War was ended
that flow of opium and heroin into this
country fell off very dramatically in
fact from nineteen seventy-five to
eighty four the opium production in the
Golden Triangle fell from 200 tons a
year to about thirty tons a year and
there were other reasons why it fell
there was a drought and so on but
undoubtedly one of the reasons was there
just weren't so many planes flying back
and forth between the United States and
Indochina I think people are vaguely
aware also that when America in its
wisdom chose to support the Contras
against the sandanista regime in
Nicaragua and in connection with
that beefed up a rather corrupt and
rather militarized government in
Honduras we had a very sharp rise in the
amount of cocaine that was flowing into
this country precisely through Central
America anywhere from a fifth to a third
or perhaps even more of it coming
through Honduras where the CIA was
actually dealing with the leading drug
trafficker in Honduras and the US State
Department was renting a planes from his
own private air air line set Co in order
to support the Contras what you may be
less aware of and I'd almost actually
like to ask this audience I assume
you're an audience how many people
roughly knew something like what I just
told you already
most people how many people are aware
that perhaps even more dramatically we
had this problem with heroin from the
afghan-pakistan border which increased
from we had almost no such heroin coming
into this country in 1979 which was the
year that under Carter I may say the
Democratic president is big nerf
Brzezinski in the National Security
Council decided to give support to
various guerrilla bands in Afghanistan
which he knew were supporting themselves
from the drug traffic and that by
official published figures the heroin in
this country from that region went from
about zero percent of the total in 1979
to over 50 percent by 1984 but by a
secret Reagan document had already
reached
over 50% maybe 60% by 1981 that is how
dramatic the increase in the flow of
drugs into this country and it was the
same story as Vietnam in the Contras all
over again they same trucks in Pakistan
that took the arms up to the frontier
where the trucks that brought the heroin
back down and they had heroin labs up
there and that heroin found its way to
the United States in fact there was a
famous pizza connection in New York and
they've been books about it a movie
about it I believe 18 and 90% of that
heroin was coming from the sea how many
people had a vague idea about that
see almost nobody far fewer people there
was some publicity to the Contra drug
problem in the 1980s but there was
virtually none about the Afghan heroin
problem which in terms of quantity was
much greater and this leads to where I
think I'd like to end my talk I'd like
also bring it in at the beginning the
problem of the press in this country I'm
going to tell you things a lot of things
which you may find hard to believe some
of them I find hard to believe one of
the reasons it's hard to believe them
that there's so little about this in the
United States press and in fact there's
almost an inverse relationship as the
problem gets bigger more often than not
if there's government policy involved as
there was in Afghanistan the press
coverage drops so there had been
something in the New York Times about
the drug trafficking of the Mujahideen
in Afghanistan in 1979 and 1980 in fact
there was a warning in the New York
Times an op-ed piece by somebody who was
in the White House supposed to be
getting the documents on Afghanistan
because he was in charge of drug policy
and he realized suddenly he had been cut
out again this was by the Carter
Administration
and he warned that we might have a
problem on our hands well I've
researched the New York Times index and
there was not a single further story on
Afghanistan Mujahideen and heroin until
the middle of 1986 which is about the
time that the Reagan administration
decided that the drug problem was now so
bad that they had to disengage from
these Mujahideen so in that crucial six
year period where the heroin went from
0% to 60%
we heard exactly nothing about it in the
press and this is a depressing
phenomenon but also in a way a ray of
hope it means that if we can rouse
popular consciousness on this thing and
get the right degree of public interest
in this topic we can force the press to
do its job properly
and I believe that that is a major
factor in order to changing a drug
policy which in terms of its
international aspects in this country is
I think still almost completely crazy
and buy all kinds of expert accounts
from inside the Reagan administration
the Bush administration and now the
Clinton administration a policy which
hasn't worked and has represented a
waste of money unless you happen to be
interested in something else like
suppressing column gorillas in Colombia
or Peru that that is a different story
but in terms of efficacy in actually
stopping drugs from coming to this
country not efficient at all now I don't
claim fully to understand this problem I
don't think anyone fully understands it
we're talking about an illicit traffic
so it isn't reported to the Census
Bureau
into the Department of Labor and the way
other things are I just want to say this
traffic completely dominates north-south
relations and increasingly I believe
it's going to dominate east-west
relations as well and particularly our
relations with Russia by converging
Russia into a capitalist state we have
helped convert it into a major drug
trafficking area and there are very
important links between the Mafia in
Russia and the Mafia in Brooklyn and it
turns out that as so many times before
so some of the key figures in that
Brooklyn mafia that have links to Russia
are protected they cannot be arrested
the police are sold to stay away from
them because they have something to do
with who knows what
covert operations that are still being
sanctioned by the CIA it's very
dangerous to try and give figures here
but the CIA itself back in 1981 came up
with an estimate of the size of the
global drug trade used newspapers and
periodicals at the time we're guessing
it was maybe a hundred and fifty billion
a year
the CIA initially told Reagan that it
was more like 300 billion a year and
then they discovered one marijuana field
in Mexico that this one field had 10,000
hectares in it which meant they had to
double their estimate of marijuana
production in Mexico and they came up
with an estimate of 500 billion now that
figure was probably too high because
when you go to the DEA and the FBI for
estimates of the drug trade they tend to
give very high estimates because that's
how they get a bigger budget in next
year's thing so it lets
it may not be 500 not have been 500
billion it may only have been 150
billions of that I think is a bit low
way of understanding these in
inconceivably large figures is to
consider that in that same year the
total legitimate trade in the world all
of it every country with every other
country was about a trillion dollars so
that if the CIA had been right then 500
billion would have represented a figure
which was half to the total of all
legitimate trade I'm a little bit
comparing apples and oranges here but I
just want to give you the sense that it
dominates trade and in many many
different ways a figure that I think is
probably more reliable also from the CIA
in 1981 which was that Colombia and
Mexico were generating 75 percent of
their foreign exchange earnings that's
$1 through the drug trade now this was
at a time when US banks the biggest
banks and above all Citibank one of the
biggest of all were very overexposed in
Latin American debt and I'd like you to
think for a moment if it's true that 75%
of the foreign exchange earnings of
Mexico were coming from the drug trade
and Citibank knew that they Mexico had
to meet its debt payments to Citibank or
not only was Mexico going to go bankrupt
but Citibank was going to go bankrupt
and this was talked about in the early
1980s you can see that American bankers
might have rather ambivalent feelings
about the drug trade the one country
that has consistently been able to meet
its debt payments without a problem
through all the good years and the bad
years has been Colombia
because cocaine has become the number
one export of Colombia and there's
nothing like it isn't it for it beats
coffee and it beats oil it beats all the
traditional things in terms of meeting
your balance of payments I think it's
dangerous to go on too much about the
economics I wanted to have a chapter in
cocaine politics about this and my
co-author who's not as crazy as I am
I said look people are going to have
trouble believing this book anyway and
we're solidly documented on the politics
and the economics is harder to document
just because the CIA said it's true it
isn't necessarily true so let's not put
it in the book and I didn't put it in
the book and that's one reason I'm
sharing it with you now it's the
frustration I had it not being able to
talk about it in the book because I
think that the economics are obviously
even if we don't even if no one fully
understands them they are extremely
important when for example marijuana is
the number one agricultural product from
California which is an agricultural
state and maybe the number one
agricultural product in the United
States we're talking about something
that's important but I'm here to talk to
you about the politics of the drug
traffic now right now the u.s. is
involved in the internal politics of
Colombia of Peru of Guatemala and of
Mexico other countries too but these are
four big countries where we are where
there are revolutionary movements
guerrilla movements and where we are
allied with right-wing forces in those
same countries which are in turn
involved in one way or another but in
all four of those countries info
with the drug traffic in those countries
in fact the revelations recently from
Mexico have made it clear that the
involvement of the ruling party PRI and
the management of the drug trade in
Mexico are almost two faces of the same
institution and I will be coming back to
Mexico later in my talk we are sending
money to and troops and helicopters
Vietnam all over again in Peru and to a
lesser extent in Colombia in the name of
fighting drugs but we are sending it to
armed forces and to police forces who
are themselves involved with the drug
traffic the drug traffic is on our side
not on the other side and in Colombia
for example a lot of the of the small
arms that we have shipped to Colombia
have ended up in parts of Colombia where
there are no drugs at all there are only
guerrillas and it is very clear that our
support for a war on drugs in Colombia
is being deflected and converted into
that country's war on guerrillas I'm not
here to say guerrillas are good and
governments are bad but I am saying that
it is not it is being consciously
diverted from the purposes which were
explained to Congress when those funds
were voted and particularly in Peru I
think we run the risk of a another
Vietnam situation where in the end the
very planes that are sent over there to
keep drugs from coming into this country
may be the planes which bring the drugs
back to the United States as certainly
the planes sent to Vietnam repeatedly
brought drugs back
United States so I'm saying as a
practical message if we want to do
something about our terrible drug
problem in this country which has just
devastated whole neighborhoods and you
don't have to go very far in most of the
major cities of the United States to see
what terrible results the the the social
costs of drugs in this country is take
those funds that are currently being
spent down there and not achieving their
goal and redirect them to demand-side
solutions in drug rehabilitation
programs drug education programs
Clinton incidentally was elected on a
program of promise to do just that but
now that the bureaucracy is getting to
him it things are toting back the other
way
now I should make clear that I am NOT
saying that the see the CIA and the US
military are themselves as agencies
consciously drug trafficking or setting
out to support the drug traffic that is
not the main problem now in the case of
the CIA there have been some rather
hairy moments in its history we're CIA
individuals have trafficked in drugs and
more spectacularly in Vietnam where an
entire CIA airline Air America became
the means by which the Hmong or Maio
tribesmen --zz opium and heroin was
shipped out to the rest of the world
because they were entirely surrounded by
patted Lao that is to say enemy forces
at the time that is obviously added to
the problem but that is not the problem
that I'm talking about either the
problem that I'm talking about is that
as I've already said over and over all
around the world the CIA facing
left-wing enemy
collaborates with right-wing forces who
are already implicated in the drug trade
and with both directly with drug
traffickers and with their political
allies Laos was perhaps an extreme
situation but it wasn't just the male
long tribesman who were growing opium
and processing it into heroin to be
flown out on Air America planes we were
supporting we were essentially paying
the the the wages of the Royal Laotian
army the head of which ran the largest
heroin refinery in Laos and everybody
knew it in Laos but you couldn't get
anybody in the State Department or the
CIA to admit it and as I say that's an
extreme instance but the reason why
Southeast Asia has been such a recurring
source of heroin is because to a greater
or lesser extent we did do the same
thing in Thailand in Taiwan and
disastrously again in the 1980s in
Afghanistan so in all these countries
you'll get politically protected drug
traffickers there's a word that's grown
up since World War two the word kingpin
what is a kingpin a kingpin is somebody
who is running the traffic and the
reason in almost invariably in the third
world he is running the traffic is
because he is the man with the
connection the man who is has made some
kind of deal with the local police or
with the local military it's usually the
g2 or intelligence department of the
military or with all of the above and
who may or may not the kingpin may be
called upon to supplement the amount of
violence that's being inflicted on the
population because drug traffickers are
it's not
just that they have money they have
their own troops and their own troops
are well-trained in just the sort of
thing that the CIA frequently wants to
see done in other countries killing
people selectively or in a large kind of
way I'm going to take a few a couple of
countries and look at them in more
detail but this is the overall problem
and so that the result of CIA
interventions all over the world even if
it's not the conscious intention of what
the CIA has set out to do is to create a
global system of mutually connected
kingpins who all trade with each other
are all protected by their local
governments and so in a classic way in
the lair the time of the Contras cocaine
could start in Bolivia or Peru where it
was protected go to Colombia to be with
the coca up there would be processed in
Colombia where again they had
connections in the government
transshipped to buy long flying planes
to areas like Honduras or Guatemala or
Mexico and then offloaded into smaller
play or the Bahamas I shouldn't leave
them out and then every step along the
line these people are protected by their
connections in the government and then
finally the last step is to get it into
the United States I should point out
that the CIA is not the only
intelligence agency in the world that is
collaborated with drug traffickers our
problem is not just that they happen to
be our agency it's also that they are
certainly at this point the largest such
agency and therefore the biggest single
influence in this global system that I'm
talking about the CIA did not invent
this practice largely the problem we
have here is that up till World War two
a good deal of the third world was
dominated by Imperial systems from
Europe which particularly the British
and the French in one way or another had
been founded on the drug traffic back in
the in the 18th and 19th century when
the drug traffic was legal and which in
the case of England was the foundation
of the British Empire you're listening
to Peter Dale Scott on the politics of
global drug trafficking this is
alternative radio if you'd like to get
copies of this program please call the
following toll-free number one eight
hundred four four four nineteen seventy
seven stay tuned at the end for complete
details on ordering the sort of route
economy of the british imperial system
was a triangular trade that when opium
was grown in india they were very moral
they wouldn't allow it to be sold in
india they would ship it straight out to
china china didn't want it but they
fought an opium war and forced china to
take it in the name of free trade
america - you know john quincy adams
said that the chinese were violating the
laws of god by trying to violate free
trade and keep opium out of china those
words and that trade have certainly come
back to haunt us now in the united
states when we are trying to do
ourselves what the Chinese did and then
that would pay that opium trade to China
paid for tea which was then shipped to
England the tax on tea paid for the
entire British Navy and therefore was
the financial key to the British
imperial system and then finally the tea
paid for Manchester cotton goods which
were shipped to India and forced I think
is the word on the Indian population at
the expense of the native Indian
industries that was all legal in the
nineteenth century and it led to a
system where
the British and the French colonies in
Asia in Southeast Asia and arrayed
financed their government expenses by
controlling what they call the opium
farm they just saw to it that opium was
sold in the colonies and they taxed it
and when America took over from France
and to a lesser extent England in that
area it inherited a system in which drug
trafficking was part of that imperial
system the whole social structure
reflected this we chose to preserve that
social structure and so in 1954 when the
French moved out of Saigon and General
Lansdale in the CIA moved in one of the
first things they did was Lansdale did
was capture control of the local drug
traffic which was then run for a decade
by node in GM's brother no Dinu and his
wife and that was not a novelty that was
a continuation of an older system I I
really want to talk more about Central
America Latin America and the two key
countries I think now of Guatemala and
Mexico Guatemala is a kind of paradigm
of what might have happened in what has
happened instead after a decade or so of
a tyrant who Biko who was very much like
Somoza and Nicaragua the Americans were
happy to see him go because he had to be
in a little too close to Hitler in World
War two and you had the makings of a
liberal bourgeois democracy in Guatemala
but liberal democracies get crazy ideas
and the leader of Guatemala are man's
thought well look United Fruit has
millions of acres of jungle which they
aren't using we won't nationalize the
the banana fields that they are using we
will just nationalize the land that they
aren't using and the result was a CIA
coup which toppled our Bence and in the
process destroyed the hopes for liberal
democracy in Guatemala with a legacy
which down to the present who what do we
say 60,000 80,000 killed a hundred
thousand killed certainly one of the
most repressive systems and also one
which is corrupted by drugs it's
interesting to see that it was not
corrupted by drugs right away that the
man whom the CIA actually installed a
colonel Castillo Armas was in his own
way a Puritan and a conservative and he
was trying to preserve Guatemala as it
was with United Fruit in place the
American mob arrived rather soon
afterwards encouraged by the second
Fruit Company standard fruit who were
being squeezed out by United Fruit and
they tried to get a casino in Guatemala
and Castillo Armas said no the next
thing you knew Castillo Armas had been
murdered a new military team had taken
over they were pleased to have a casino
and the man who had been approached by
John Roselli on behalf of the u.s. mob
was now running the counterinsurgency
effort in Guatemala many many radical
historians have looked at the rise of
counterinsurgency in Guatemala
solely from the point of view of what
the US government did but one of the
reasons that Washington finds it so
difficult now to change anything it's a
terrible embarrassment now to what
administration's in Washington the
amount
murder that there has been in Guatemala
but when you get a human rights
president like Carter for example who
wants to do something about it the
military says ok we won't take your
dirty money and then instead they
traffic in drugs and there was in fact
human rights abuses in some countries
increased when Carter was president
because as long as they were having to
answer to the military they had to
there's a certain amount of decorum
involved you had to kill people in the
back streets and not in the front
streets but there was a reorganisation
of counter-terror counterinsurgency all
these various militaries El Salvador
Guatemala under the leadership of the
Argentinian generals 1976 to 1980 which
was essentially a drug finance system
and in fact there was a famous cocaine
coup in Bolivia which virtually
installed the drug traffickers in
control of Bolivia the idea was it would
pay for counterinsurgency all over the
all over the region this was not
anti-american in fact one of the people
who rose to power in this period and
Colonel Dobie we saw in El Salvador was
someone who simultaneously went to the
School of the Americas and then went to
an Argentine sponsored conference in
which drug traffickers and the military
intelligence people were plotting
together including my favorite man Mario
Sandoval Alarcon from Guatemala who was
very important at that point he's not
himself a military man but of course the
carter was cutting back on direct aid to
the military so the godfather of all the
death squads in all the countries of
latin america in this period was this
aristocrat of if that's the word from
guatemala mario sandoval lr cone who
virtually
he forced Colonel Dobie saw on the rest
of the El Salvador hierarchy and drugs
were involved both in Sandoval's
activities and in Dobie soles activities
and if it's true in the light of the
recent revelations about how not only
hundreds of thousands of or tens of
thousands of Guatemalans have been
killed but also to one American and the
husband of another which has very much
brought the problem home to the United
States which is what I believe has to
happen this is the there has to be this
kind of consciousness-raising
in the United States but if it is
actually the case as Clinton says that
all the aid is been cut off I am sure
that the g2 and the d2 of the Guatemalan
military will do what they have done in
the past and in fact have been doing
pretty continuously they'll just rely
more on drug trafficking not just
cocaine which has been coming through
for years but increasingly heroin
because it's interesting and in the
areas where of Guatemala where there has
been the most vigorous counterinsurgency
you now have serious planting of opium
it began in a big way about the time
that the Afghanistan operation tapered
off and this has become a new source of
heroin for the region and some say I
will be increasingly important for the
United States as will I want to say
something about Mexico which is hardest
for me to be briefed about we wrote a
bit about it in cocaine politics how the
the DFS the direccin federal security
todd the lead security agency in mexico
would say setup with the aid of the CIA
in Mexico became in effect a licensing
agency for other drug traffic and we
quote another author as saying who in
turn is quoting from someone from the
DEA saying that a little pin saying you
were in the DFS meant that people in the
DEA were not allowed to touch them which
meant that they were in effect licensed
to traffic in drugs there was a lot of
furor about this rack around 1985 when
an American DEA agent was murdered
murdered down in Guadalajara I think it
was in the western side of Mexico and it
turned out how deeply involved the
Mexican government and the Mexican
ruling party the Prix were involved in
the drug traffic and really the whole
dividing up of governorships is in many
of the provinces not all of them it's a
way of dividing up the take from the
drug traffic so that the problem of
corruption is I think further much more
articulated into the entire structure of
the PRI than the idea that it's some
remnant element that is still trying to
hang on to the past and it turns out
what people should really have known I
think that what looks like a courageous
crack down on the drug traffickers in
Guadalajara or in Tijuana is in fact a
rearrangement of the drug traffic you
are cracking down on the West Coast drug
trafficking because you are getting more
money now from people on the East Coast
and that seems to be that the instead of
the the fight within the party being a
fight between traditionalists and
modernists as I say there's probably
some truth some truth to that analysis
but another much more cynical analysis
is that it's a fight between those
people who
allied to the West Coast traffic and
those people who are allied to the East
Coast traffic the so-called Gulf Cartel
that we have just begun to her hear
about and are now told is even bigger
than the Guadalajara cartel which we
used to be told was the biggest and in
all of this Mexico is shaping up very
much like Colombia where we heard a
great deal about the Medellin Cartel and
then we finally heard that the Medellin
Cartel had been broken what it actually
happened was that all along the
government was much more in bed with the
competing cartel the Cali cartel and
would never have been able to break the
medellin cartel without the information
and the in fact the the death squads
that were supplied by the Cali cartel
and it is true in a funny way that a
kind of peace is beginning to return to
Colombia at least on the drug frontier
but that's because the Cali cartel has
regained the monopoly which it more or
less enjoyed before the Upstate upstart
Medellin Cartel tried to cut into things
and were beaten down with the support of
among other things millions of dollars
of US aid I just simply want to close by
saying it should make us aware of how
totally corrupt these systems are and
that when our interventions are
restricted to interventions with
violence whether we are beefing up
police forces or the military or
counterinsurgency forces what we are
doing is preserving a system and I come
back to Peru a system which is so
stratified so hopelessly undemocratic
that we are involving ourselves in a war
that will go on for a very long time
and one in which drugs is going to play
a big role and it's going to play a big
role because those drugs are profitable
because they are going
be shipped up here to the United States
and so we should stay out of those
countries thanks very much
please talk further about media coverage
of drug trafficking I have a comment I
chapter in cocaine politics about this
very complicated problem it isn't like
the it's it's not like some countries
where the government says print this or
don't print that the basic problem is
that particularly for the so-called
press of record the the the New York
Times the what the Washington Post to
almost as great extent the Wall Street
Journal and the Los Angeles Times their
major source of information is the CIA
and they want to keep it that way they
are not they're not going to get up like
me and just sound off loose at the mouth
about what the CIA is doing because if
they do that the CIA is not going to
maintain its traditional relationship
with them the New York Times
cannot afford to contemplate something
like that so and by the way I became
very aware of this press problem which I
think is it's really where we should
begin is to change the attitude of the
press and I saw it firsthand because I
was in Washington for about seven months
no for about six months during the
iran-contra crisis I had a very good
journalist come to me I mean one of the
good journalists I don't want to
identify him but he said you know I had
the Oliver North story for two years and
I never printed a word of it you know
why I said no wanting to hear him say it
why he said Oliver North was my best
source and this is why everybody in
Washington you about Oliver North and it
took a long time for it to be the story
to be broken when it was broken it
wasn't broken in the New York Times of
The Washington Post it was broken
I think chiefly by the knight-ridder
papers and those papers will tend to be
better on drug issues and things like
that because they don't have as big a
stake in maintaining the CIA connection
and they actually you know journalism is
supposed to reward you for scoops and
things like that and to some extent that
works with the smaller press it doesn't
work with the new york times the
government connection comes first i
actually sat in a secret hearing and i
talked about this in cocaine politics in
which all of the witnesses talked about
Contras and drugs Contras and drugs
countries and drugs the next day the
Washington Post ran a story on this
secret hearing saying in effect a that
this hearing had heard that hundreds of
witnesses had testified that there was
no connection between countries and
drugs the exact opposite of the truth
the exact opposite of the truth it was
so wrong that two days later the
Washington Post printed a very small
retraction actually congressman Rangel
whose committee it was wrote a letter
and he said I insist this be published
and they wouldn't publish it but they
did print a very small retraction that
was from I believe July 22nd to July
24th 1987 but on July 23rd 1987 the
Democrats not even the Republicans the
Democrats in the iran-contra committee
took the false story and made it the
basis of a staff report saying that
hundreds of witnesses could find no
connection between the Contras and drugs
which got printed up in the official
iran-contra report even though the story
had been retracted one day later now
actually it was the Republicans that put
it into the report but I began to
realize that Washington is a city of
games and that this
was an example of the kind of games that
are played with public opinion and that
no politician in Washington wants to
really seriously take on this CIA drug
connection the man who came closest to
it Senator Kerry was a committee that I
was working with and he looked into the
Contras but this is a long answer but
but I'm really I feel this is all very
important and he had a drug pilot before
the committee and he asked him a
question about a particular shipment and
the pilots attorney jumped up and said I
see what you trying to do with Senator
Kerry you're trying to drag the CIA into
this and Senator Kerry said oh no no no
he said I promised senator Boren I would
keep the CIA out of these hearings and I
am NOT bringing it in now and that I
think by the way I very much admire that
Kerry did what he did he not only
exposed contra drug connections but he
got reelected and I think it's more or
less true that every single politician
who in a major way has challenged the
CIA in Washington senator Church I think
of in particular but all of them have
failed to be reelected and so that's one
of the reasons that the solution to this
problem is not going to come from
Washington it may come from Durango but
it's not going to come from Washington
is the war on drugs a form of social
control well first of all I imagine many
people are in this room already know
this and that's perhaps why you're here
the United States incarcerate a higher
percentage of its citizens than any
other country in the world and there's
some pretty mean countries out there you
know Indonesia
South Africa at one point Soviet Union
China they're not as bad as the United
States and it impacts primarily on
people of color partly because it's no
coincidence
the drugs we tolerate are the drugs that
whites like to consume tobacco and
alcohol far and away the biggest killers
by the way I mean sometimes this is we
say we're doing this to save to save
lives well if we're going to save lives
we should outlaw nicotine and alcohol
but those happen to be the drugs of
choice of the white majority and it's
changed but originally drugs like heroin
well was opium originally marijuana if
you go back in time there were drugs of
minorities and in fact it is the
incredibly racist it's partly funny but
it's partly shattering to read the
Federal Bureau of Narcotics reports from
the 1930s about this this is the reefer
madness era you know
invariably it is some young Mexican
American took a toke on a marijuana
cigarette and went home and killed his
mother you know it was a reported year
after year in the Federal Bureau of
Narcotics until they got what they
wanted which was the outlawing of
marijuana
which took care of all these old
Treasury agents who had nothing to do
after the end of prohibition I mean it
was it was case of target the minorities
in order to make jobs for for
bureaucrats I don't think it was
primarily target them in order to
control them but I think that in terms
of something you could do something
about you could address the whole gamut
of crazy drug policies that we have it
isn't just the CIA part alone that's
responsible the first thing of all are
these these laws that give the judges no
choice but to send people away so you
know if it's a choice between having
four ounces of cocaine or murdering your
mother it's probably better to murder
your mother you won't be in jail for as
long I mean it's become ridiculous but
but but that's where we are and it's not
likely to change I mean it's it's the
sort of thing that currently is
set in concrete but it has to change and
it's interesting by the way that this is
an area where I see the left and the
right
converging it's the status quo that was
to keep things going and I never thought
that you know you take a libertarian
economists like Milton Friedman I never
thought I would or William Buckley I
didn't think I'd ever have anything in
common with these people but they're
saying this is terrible and we have to
stop it and and it is terrible and we do
have to stop it now you raised another
question which I expected would be asked
are we doing this in order to control
minority populations I think it's more
the way it's worked out than the way it
was intended but it was certainly when
Bennett was the head of the the drug
czar as they call it as an interesting
they would use the words are if as if
that's what we need in America is
bizarre it's very clear that the
conscious policy of Bennett was to make
white middle class Americans stop using
cocaine and he more or less succeeded I
mean you actually do it just shows you
that government policies can make a
difference there was a drop in white
middle-class consumption what does that
mean it means that those white
middle-class people who still consume
cocaine and there are quite a lot of
them they now go to black neighborhoods
it's it's it's more by I think in
direction than by design but it is
aggravated the problem in the minority
neighborhoods and in many neighborhoods
like like Oakland for example is just a
few miles from where I live in Berkeley
it's a war zone down there and young
black males have to be very terrified of
other black males but they also be
they're very terrified of the police who
may just rush up in a car jump out sale
I on the fly on the ground face down
spread your legs and then they come
and seal them all over looking for
cocaine they don't bother about search
warrants and things like that because
it's a war on drugs and in war you can
do anything well they really do just
about anything to people in those
neighborhoods and I don't see how we can
expect people to want to live in our
country if we treat so many of them this
way so I think it has to it has to
change that was Peter Dale Scott on the
politics of global drug trafficking he
spoke at Fort Lewis College in Durango
Colorado in April 1995 Peter Dale Scott
former UC Berkeley professor and
Canadian diplomat has authored several
books on drug trafficking this program
is produced by alternative radio and
independent award-winning weekly series
AR has produced a number of programs on
drug trafficking and the drug war
featuring such voices as Noam Chomsky
Alfred McCoy john stockwell dan Baum
Gary Webb and Angela Davis to access our
catalog visit our website www.weg.net
Excel or trafficking call us toll free
at 1-800-455-1052
you